## **EHR Ops Dashboard**

This repository is to guide you through EHR Ops Dashboard. EHR Ops Dashboard is a tableau dashboard provided by AllofUs analytics team to reflect the data quality across over HPOs.

⚠ NO PHI entry in this repo.

### High Level Summary

1. Definition of metrics and related queries
2. How to read the dashboard
3. What's to expect in new coming features

---

#### Definition of Metrics and Related Queries

**1. Data Transfer Rate A**

- Definition: The number of participants with EHR data per HPO divided by the number of all participants eligible for EHR data transfer
- Metrics: Numerator is generated by `eligible_participants_ehr.sql`. Denominator is generated by `all_eligible_participants.sql`

**2. Data Transfer Rate B**

- Definition: The number of participants with EHR data per HPO divided by the number of all participants eligible for EHR data transfer who have completed an in-person visit (physical measurements OR biospecimen)
- Metrics: Numerator is generated by `eligible_participants_ehr.sql`. Denominator is generated by `in_person_participants.sql`

**3. General Conformance**

- GC-1 \
  Every row in the condition_occurrence, visit_occurrence, procedure_occurrence, drug_exposure, measurement and observation tables should have a well defined concept_id - GC-1 Standard - Every row should have a standard concept_id with correct domain and it's not null or 0. - The metric is generated by `gc_1_standard.sql`. - GC-1 Source - Every row should have a source concept_id with correct domain and it's not null or 0. - The metric is generated by `gc_1_source.sql`.
- GC-2 \
  Every foreign keys should be valid. For example, the foreign keys checked in condition_occurrence_table includes condition_concept_id, visit_occurrence_id, person_id, condition_type_concept_id, condition_source_concept_id, condition_status_concept_id
- GC-3
  - GC-3 Standard
    - Every row should have a concept_id which is not null or 0.
    - The metric is generated by `gc_1_standard.sql`.
  - GC-3 Source
    - Every row should have a source concept_id which is not null or 0.
    - The metric is generated by `gc_1_source.sql`.

**4. Date Conformance**

- DC-1
  - There should not be any end dates before start dates in any of the clinical data tables.
  - The metric is generated by `dc_1.sql`
- DC-2
  - No data points should exist beyond 30 days of death date, if applicable.
  - The metric is generated by `dc_2.sql`
- DC-3
  - No dates should be prior to 1900 (for observation) or 1980 (for other clinical data tables).
  - The metric is generated by `dc_3.sql`
- DC-4
  - Date and datetime fields should match.
  - The metric is generated by `dc_4.sql`

**5. General DQ Metrics**

- Unit Concept Failure
  - In measurement table, rows with numerical value_source_value or value_as_number should have standard concept_id and have the domain "Unit"
  - The metric is generated by `unit_route_failure.sql`
- Route Concept Failure
  - In drug_exposure table, concept_ids should both be standard and have the domain "Route"
  - The metric is generated by `unit_route_failure.sql`
- Visit ID Failure
  - In condition and procedure tables, rows should not have null/0 visit_occurrence_id and these visit_occrrence_id should also exist in visit_occurrence table
  - The metric is generated by `visit_id_failure.sql`
- Duplicates
  - In each table, there should not be duplicated rows.
  - The metric is generated by `duplicates.sql`

**6. COVID Mapping**

- In measurement table, rows related to COVID-19 results (i.e. rows with concept_id being desendant of 756055) should have neither null or 0 in value_as_concept_id and the value_source_value field should be mapped to standard concepts we provide on our website.
- https://sites.google.com/view/ehrupload/data-quality-metrics/covid-19-data-mapping?authuser=0
- The metric is generated by `covid_mapping.sql`

**7. Physical Measurements**

- All sites should be submitting data on participants' physical measurements. Specifically, we check against body height, body weight, and BMI.
- The metric is generated by `physical_meas.sql`

#### How to Read the Dashboard

- Filter Session

  - You could filter on the awardee or organization level to focus on the sites that you are interested in.
  - Click the filter and then apply the selections.

- Aggregate Data Transfer Rate Session

  - This session shows aggregate number of awardees/organizations with data transfer rate falling in different threshold.
  - The calculation of Data Transfer Rate A and B are in the tooltips when you hover over the aggreagate numbers.
  - If you click on the number, the dashboard will be filtered to show the sites which are in that number category only.

- Data Transfer Rate Session

  - This session is a detailed dashboard with all organizations' metrics for Data Transfer Rate and most recent submission time.
  - You could hover over the green bar to see the break-down of participants with different status (eligible participants, eligible participants with EHR data and eligible participants with in-person visit)
  - You could also hover over the blue dot to see details of the metrics.
  - The calculation and definition are in the tooltips.

- Data Conformance Session

  - This session is showing the general conformance and date conformance metrics.
  - If you hover over the cell, the success rate break-down by each table will show up. This is for your reference to check your table in further detail.

- Definition Session
  - This session is giving you the definition of each jargon and metric.

#### What's to expect in new coming features?

Here are the metrics still under design and implementation:

- Trending chart of metrics
- Other measurements and drug integration

## SQL Compilation

Use `compile.py` to render, or compile, query templates into runnable SQL.

### Requirements

- Python 3.7+

_Note: The examples below assume a modern shell environment._

### Example 1: Compiling a single template file

Assuming this is the contents of `query_1.sql`:

```sql
SELECT
 field_1
,field_2
FROM `{{project_id}}.{{dataset_id}}.table_1`
```

executing

```bash
python compile.py query_1.sql --project_id 'drc-prod' --dataset_id 'ehr-ops'
```

stores the compiled file at `.compiled/query_1.sql`

```sql
SELECT
 field_1
,field_2
FROM `drc-prod.ehr-ops.table_1`
```

### Example 2: Compiling multiple files

Assuming these template files exist:

```
query_1.sql
metrics/query_2.sql
```

executing the command

```bash
python compile.py **/*.sql --project_id 'drc-prod' --dataset_id 'ehr-ops'
```

compiles them and saves the results at:

```
.compiled/query_1.sql
.compiled/metrics/query_2.sql
```

## Workbook Version Control

The XML-formatted workbook is stored in the file `EHR Ops Dashboard.twb`. By default, the XML may contain sensitive session-specific information (usernames, project names, etc.) when saving via Tableau Desktop. This information must be stripped out before committing to the repo. Follow the following instructions to setup a pre-commit workflow that will accomplish this.

### Setup

1. Install project packages.

   `pip install - r requirements.txt`

1. Create a file named `.cipher` and add key-value pairs for variables that need to be stripped out.
   - Follow the example in `.cipher.example`.
   - Currently these 3 variables are required to be set:
     - pdr_project
     - curation_dataset
     - rdr_dataset
1. Initialize a pre-commit hook that flags the workbook for sensitive information.

   `sh ./init_pre_commit.sh`

   - Utilizes the [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/#intro) library.
   - Follows configuration in [`.pre-commit-config.yaml`](.pre-commit-config.yaml).
   - Executes the script [`strip_workbook.py`](check_workbook.py) before each commit.

### Commit Workflow

\*_Starting at the point after workbook is modified in Tableau Desktop_

1. (optional) Execute [`check_workbook.py`](check_workbook.py) script to check if workbook contains sensitive information.

   `python check_workbook.py`

1. (optional) If outputted message indicates sensitive information, execute [`strip_workbook.py`](strip_workbook.py) script to clean.

   `python strip_workbook.py`

1. Stage changes in working directory.
1. Commit the changes. An automated pre-commit process will run and do the following:
   1. Runs the `strip_workbook.py` script before committing to remove sensitive information.
   1. Runs the `restore_workbook.py` script after committing to restore variable values in workbook.
      - _Note: a minor side effect of this process is that the restored workbook is automatically re-staged. To unstage, manually execute `git reset HEAD "EHR Ops Dashboard.twb"`_

### Restoring Workbook

1. Take an already stripped workbook.
1. Execute the [`restore_workbook.py`](restore_workbook.py) script to reset variables stored in `.cipher`.
1. Open the workbook in Tableau Desktop and navigate the interface to reset data source connection parameters.
1. Proceed with development as normal.

### Pull Requests and Merging

If a pull request indicates a merge conflict:

1. In local repo, merge the destination branch into the source branch.
1. If conflicts are within the `EHR Ops Dashboard.twb` file, accept all **current** changes via a conflict resolution tool (essentially overwriting the workbook).
1. Commit and push to conclude conflict resolution.

## Developer Guide

Please reference [this guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1n7dbJSpIyyC0LDjKEJkKbgAz_GBpgwqwf0u5_yJBf6M/edit?usp=sharing) for development setup.